<17>
Chapter 37 The Lost Prophecy
Harry's feet hit solid ground again; his knees buckled a little and
the golden wizard's head fell with a resounding clunk to the floor.
He looked around and saw that he had arrived in Dumbledore's office.

<3>
Everything seemed to have repaired itself during the headmaster's absence.
The delicate silver instruments stood again upon the spindle-legged tables,
puffing and whirring serenely. The portraits of the headmasters and
headmistresses were snoozing in their frames, heads lolling back in armchairs
or against the edge of their pictures. Harry looked through the window.
There was a cool line of pale green along the horizon: Dawn was approaching.

<5>
The silence and the stillness, broken only by the occasional grunt or snuffle
of a sleeping portrait, was unbearable to him. If his surroundings could have
reflected the feelings inside him, the pictures would have been screaming
in pain. He walked around the quiet, beautiful office, breathing quickly,
trying not to think. But he had to think. … There was no escape. …
It was his fault Sirius had died; it was all his fault.

<28>
If he, Harry, had not been stupid enough to fall for Voldemort's trick,
if he had not been so convinced that what he had seen in his dream was real,
if he had only opened his mind to the possibility that Voldemort was,
as Hermione had said, banking on Harry's love of playing the hero …
It was unbearable, he would not think about it, he could not stand it. …
There was a terrible hollow inside him he did not want to feel or examine,
a dark hole where Sirius had been, where Sirius had vanished.

<11>
He did not want to have to be alone with that great, silent space,
he could not stand it —A picture behind him gave a particularly
loud grunting snore, and a cool voice said, "Ah … Harry Potter …"
Phineas Nigellus gave a long yawn, stretching his arms as he watched
Harry with shrewd, narrow eyes.

<10>
"And what brings you here in the early hours of the morning?" said Phineas.
"This office is supposed to be barred to all but the rightful headmaster.
Or has Dumbledore sent you here? Oh, don't tell me …" He gave another
shuddering yawn. "Another message for my worth-less great-great-grandson?"

<25>
Harry could not speak. Phineas Nigellus did not know that Sirius was dead,
but Harry could not tell him. To say it aloud would be to make it final,
absolute, irretrievable.

<16>
A few more of the portraits had stirred now. Terror of being
interrogated made Harry stride across the room and seize the doorknob.
It would not turn. He was shut in.
"I hope this means," said the corpulent, red-nosed wizard who hung on the
wall behind Dumbledore's desk, "that Dumbledore will soon be back with us?"
Harry turned. The wizard was eyeing him with great interest. Harry nodded.
He tugged again on the doorknob behind his back, but it remained immovable.
"Oh good," said the wizard. "It has been very dull without him, very dull
indeed."

<19>
He settled himself on the throne like chair on which he had been painted
and smiled benignly upon Harry. "Dumbledore thinks very highly of you,
as I am sure you know," he said comfortably.
"Oh yes. Holds you in great esteem."

<20>
The guilt filling the whole of Harry's chest like some monstrous, weighty
parasite now writhed and squirmed. Harry could not stand this, he could
not stand being Harry anymore. … He had never felt more trapped inside
his own head and body, never wished so intensely that he could be
somebody — anybody — else. …The empty fireplace burst into emerald-green
flame, making Harry leap away from the door, staring at the man spinning
inside the grate. As Dumbledore's tall form unfolded itself from the fire,
the wizards and witches on the surrounding walls jerked awake.
Many of them gave cries of welcome.

<14>
"Thank you," said Dumbledore softly.
He did not look at Harry at first, but walked over to the perch be-side
the door and withdrew, from an inside pocket of his robes, the tiny, ugly,
featherless Fawkes, whom he placed gently on the tray of soft ashes beneath
the golden post where the full-grown Fawkes usually stood.
"Well, Harry," said Dumbledore, finally turning away from the baby bird,
"you will be pleased to hear that none of your fellow students are going
to suffer lasting damage from the night's events."

<30>
Harry tried to say "Good," but no sound came out. It seemed to him that
Dumbledore was reminding him of the amount of damage he had caused by his
actions tonight, and although Dumbledore was for once looking at him
directly, and though his expression was kindly rather than accusatory,
Harry could not bear to meet his eyes. "Madam Pomfrey is patching
everybody up now," said Dumbledore.
"Nymphadora Tonks may need to spend a little time in St. Mungo's,
but it seems that she will make a full recovery."

<40>
Harry contented himself with nodding at the carpet,
which was growing lighter as the sky outside grew paler.
He was sure that all the portraits around the room were listening
eagerly to every word Dumbledore spoke, wondering where Dumbledore
and Harry had been and why there had been injuries.

<8>
"I know how you are feeling, Harry," said Dumbledore very quietly.
"No, you don't," said Harry, and his voice was suddenly loud and strong.
White-hot anger leapt inside him. Dumbledore knew nothing about his feelings.
"You see, Dumbledore?" said Phineas Nigellus slyly.
"Never try to understand the students. They hate it.
They would much rather be tragically misunderstood, wallow in self-pity,
stew in their own —"。 "That's enough, Phineas," said Dumbledore.
<-1>
