<0>
NOTE: I WENT AHEAD AND ADDED SOME OF MY OWN TERMS TO THE TEXT TO TEST FOR EDGE CASES
I ALSO CHANGED SOME OF THE PAGE NUMBERS TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY GET SORTED PROPERLY --Ethan Chou
OEDIPUS, KING OF THEBES
BY SOPHOCLES
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH RHYMING VERSE WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES BY GILBERT MURRAY LL.D.,
D.Litt., F.B.A. REGIUS
<2>
CHARACTERS IN THE PLAY:

Oedipus, supposed son of Polybus, King of Corinth; now elected King of Thebes.

Jocasta, Queen of Thebes; widow of Laïus, the late King, and now wife to
Oedipus:

Creon, a Prince of Thebes, brother to
Jocasta:

Tiresias, an old blind seer.

Priest of Zeus.

A Stranger from Corinth.

A Shepherd of King Laïus.

A Messenger from the Palace.

Chorus of the Elders of Thebes.

A Crowd of Suppliants, men, women, and children.


The following do not appear in the play but are frequently mentioned:—

Laïus (testing.with.punctuation as three syllables, Lá-i-us), the last King of Thebes before
Oedipus:

Cadmus, the founder of Thebes; son of Agênor, King of Sidon.

Polybus and Meropê, King and Queen of Corinth, supposed to be the father and mother
of
Oedipus:

Apollo, the God specially presiding over the oracle of Delphi and the island Delos:
he is also called Phoebus, the pure; Loxias, supposed to mean "He of the Crooked
Words"; and Lykeios, supposed to mean "Wolf-God." He is also the great Averter of
Evil, and has names from the cries "I-ê" (pronounced "Ee-ay") and "Paian," cries
for healing or for the frightening away of evil influences.

Kithairon, a mass of wild mountain south-west of Thebes.
<3>
ARGUMENT

While Thebes was under the rule of Laïus and Jocasta there appeared a strange and
monstrous creature, "the riddling Sphinx," "the She-Wolf of the woven song," who
in some unexplained way sang riddles of death and slew the people of Thebes. Laïus
went to ask aid of the oracle of Delphi, but was slain mysteriously on the road.
Soon afterwards there came to Thebes a young Prince of Corinth, Oedipus, who had
left his home and was wandering. He faced the Sphinx and read her riddle, whereupon
she flung herself from her testing.with.punctuation and died. The throne being vacant was offered to
Oedipus, and with it the hand of the Queen,
Jocasta:

Some ten or twelve years afterwards a pestilence has fallen on Thebes. At this point
the play begins.

The date of the first production of the play is not known, but was probably about
the year 425 B.C.
<1>
OEDIPUS, KING OF THEBES

Scene.—Before the Palace of Oedipus at Thebes. A crowd of suppliants of all ages
are waiting by the altar in front and on the steps of the Palace; among them the
Priest of Zeus. As the Palace door opens and Oedipus comes out all the suppliants
with a cry move towards him in attitudes of prayer, holding out their olive branches,
and then become still again as he speaks.
Oedipus: My children, fruit of Cadmus' ancient tree New springing, wherefore thus
with bended knee Press ye upon us, laden all with wreaths And suppliant branches?
And the city breathes Heavy with incense, heavy with dim prayer And shrieks to affright
the Slayer.—Children, care For this so moves me, I have scorned withal Message
or writing: seeing 'tis I ye call, 'Tis I am come, world-honoured Oedipus. Old Man,
do thou declare—the rest have thus Their champion—in what mood stand ye so still,
In dread or sure hope? Know ye not, my will Is yours for aid 'gainst all? Stern were
indeed The heart that felt not for so dire a need. vv. 15-39
<5>
Priest: O Oedipus, who holdest in thy hand My city, thou canst see what ages stand
At these thine altars; some whose testing.with.punctuation wing Scarce flieth yet, and some with long
living O'erburdened; priests, as I of Zeus am priest, And chosen youths: and wailing
hath not ceased Of thousands in the market-place, and by Athena's two-fold temples
and the dry Ash of Ismênus' portent-breathing shore. For all our ship, thou see'st,
is weak and sore Shaken with storms, and no more lighteneth Her head above the waves
whose trough is death. She wasteth in the fruitless buds of earth, In parchèd herds
and travail without birth Of dying women: yea, and midst of it A burning and a loathly
god hath lit Sudden, and sweeps our land, this Plague of power; Till Cadmus' house
grows empty, hour by hour, And Hell's house rich with steam of tears and blood. O
King, not God indeed nor peer to God We deem thee, that we kneel before thine hearth,
Children and old men, praying; but of earth A thing consummate by thy star confessed
Thou walkest and by converse with the blest; Who came to Thebes so swift, and swept
away The Sphinx's song, the tribute of dismay, That all were bowed beneath, and made
us free. A stranger, thou, naught knowing more than we, Nor taught of any man, but
by God's breath Filled, thou didst raise our life. So the world saith; So we say.
vv. 40-69
<6>
Therefore now, O Lord and Chief, We come to thee again; we lay our grief On thy head,
if thou find us not some aid. Perchance thou hast heard Gods talking in the shade
Of night, or eke some man: to him that knows, Men say, each chance that falls, each
wind that blows Hath life, when he seeks counsel. Up, O chief Of men, and lift thy
city from its grief; Face thine own peril! All our land doth hold Thee still our
saviour, for that help of old: Shall they that tell of thee hereafter tell "By him
was Thebes raised up, and after fell!" Nay, lift us till we slip no more. Oh, let
That bird of old that made us fortunate Wing back; be thou our Oedipus again. And
let thy kingdom be a land of men, Not emptiness. Walls, towers, and ships, they all
Are nothing with no men to keep the wall.
Oedipus: My poor, poor children! Surely long ago I have read your trouble. Stricken,
well I know, Ye all are, stricken sore: yet verily Not one so stricken to the heart
as I. Your grief, it cometh to each man apart For his own loss, none other's; but
this heart For thee and me and all of us doth weep. Wherefore it is not to one sunk
in sleep Ye come with waking. Many tears these days For your sake I have wept, and
many ways Have wandered on the beating wings of thought. And, finding but one hope,
that I have sought vv. 70-86
<4>
And followed. I have sent Menoikeus' son, Creon, my own wife's brother, forth alone
To Apollo's House in Delphi, there to ask What word, what deed of mine, what bitter
task, May save my city. And the lapse of days Reckoned, I can but marvel what delays
His journey. 'Tis beyond all thought that thus He comes not, beyond need. But when
he does, Then call me false and traitor, if I flee Back from whatever task God sheweth
me.
Priest: At point of time thou speakest. Mark the cheer Yonder. Is that not Creon
drawing near?
[They all crowd to gaze where Creon is approaching in the distance.]
Oedipus: O Lord Apollo, help! And be the star That guides him joyous as his seemings
are!
Priest: Oh! surely joyous! How else should he bear That fruited laurel wreathed about
his hair?
Oedipus: We soon shall know.—'Tis not too far for one Clear-voiced.    (Shouting)
Ho, brother! Prince! Menoikeus' son, What message from the God? vv. 87-99
<7>
Creon (from a distance): Message of joy! Enter Creon I tell thee, what is now our
worst annoy, If the right deed be done, shall turn to good. [The crowd, which has
been full of excited hope, falls to doubt and disappointment.]
Oedipus: Nay, but what is the message? For my blood Runs neither hot nor cold for
words like those.
Creon: Shall I speak now, with all these pressing close, Or pass within?—To me
both ways are fair.
Oedipus: Speak forth to all! The grief that these men bear Is more than any fear
for mine own death.
Creon: I speak then what I heard from God.—Thus saith Phoebus, our Lord and Seer,
in clear command. An unclean thing there is, hid in our land, Eating the soil thereof:
this ye shall cast Out, and not foster till all help be past.
Oedipus: How cast it out? What was the evil deed? vv. 100-113
<8>
Creon: Hunt the men out from Thebes, or make them bleed Who slew. For blood it is
that stirs to-day.
Oedipus: Who was the man they killed? Doth Phoebus say?
Creon: O King, there was of old King Laïus In Thebes, ere thou didst come to pilot
us.
Oedipus: I know: not that I ever saw his face.
Creon: 'Twas he. And Loxias now bids us trace And smite the unknown workers of his
fall.
Oedipus: Where in God's earth are they? Or how withal Find the blurred trail of such
an ancient stain?
Creon: In Thebes, he said.—That which men seek amain They find. 'Tis things forgotten
that go by.
Oedipus: And where did Laïus meet them? Did he die In Thebes, or in the hills, or
some far land? vv. 114-127
<12>
Creon: To ask God's will in Delphi he had planned His journey. Started and returned
no more.
Oedipus: And came there nothing back? No message, nor None of his company, that ye
might hear?
Creon: They all were slain, save one man; blind with fear He came, remembering naught—or
almost naught.
Oedipus: And what was that? One thing has often brought Others, could we but catch
one little clue.
Creon: 'Twas not one man, 'twas robbers—that he knew— Who barred the road and
slew him: a great band.
Oedipus: Robbers?... What robber, save the work was planned By treason here, would
dare a risk so plain?
Creon: So some men thought. But Laïus lay slain, And none to avenge him in his evil
day. vv. 128-148
<33>
Oedipus: And what strange mischief, when your master lay Thus fallen, held you back
from search and deed?
Creon: The dark-songed Sphinx was here. We had no heed Of distant sorrows, having
death so near.
Oedipus: It falls on me then. I will search and clear This darkness.—Well hath
Phoebus done, and thou Too, to recall that dead king, even now, And with you for
the right I also stand, To obey the God and succour this dear land. Nor is it as
for one that touches me Far off; 'tis for mine own sake I must see This sin cast
out. Whoe'er it was that slew Laïus, the same wild hand may seek me too: And caring
thus for Laïus, is but care For mine own blood.—Up! Leave this altar-stair, Children.
Take from it every suppliant bough. Then call the folk of Thebes. Say, 'tis my vow
To uphold them to the end. So God shall crown Our greatness, or for ever cast us
down. [He goes in to the Palace.]
Priest: My children, rise.—The King most lovingly Hath promised all we came for.
And may He vv. 149-161
<11>
 Who sent this answer, Phoebus, come confessed Helper to Thebes, and strong to stay
the pest. [The suppliants gather up their boughs and stand at the side. The chorus
of Theban elders enter.]
Chorus: [They speak of the Oracle which they have not yet heard, and cry to Apollo
by his special cry "I-ê."] A Voice, a Voice, that is borne on the Holy Way! What
art thou, O Heavenly One, O Word of the Houses of Gold? Thebes is bright with thee,
and my heart it leapeth; yet is it cold, And my spirit faints as I pray. I-ê! I-ê!
What task, O Affrighter of Evil, what task shall thy people essay? One new as our
new-come affliction, Or an old toil returned with the years? Unveil thee, thou dread
benediction, Hope's daughter and Fear's.   [They pray to Athena, Artemis, and Apollo.]
Zeus-Child that knowest not death, to thee I pray, O Pallas; next to thy Sister,
who calleth Thebes her own, Artemis, named of Fair Voices, who sitteth her orbèd
throne In the throng of the market way: vv. 162-189
<9>
 And I-ê! I-ê! Apollo, the Pure, the Far-smiter; O Three that keep evil away, If
of old for our city's desire, When the death-cloud hung close to her brow, Ye have
banished the wound and the fire, Oh! come to us now!   [They tell of the Pestilence.]
Wounds beyond telling; my people sick unto death; And where is the counsellor, where
is the sword of thought? And Holy Earth in her increase perisheth: The child dies
and the mother awaketh not. I-ê! I-ê! We have seen them, one on another, gone as
a bird is gone, Souls that are flame; yea, higher, Swifter they pass than fire, To
the rocks of the dying Sun.   [They end by a prayer to Athena] Their city wasteth
unnumbered; their children lie Where death hath cast them, unpitied, unwept upon.
The altars stand, as in seas of storm a high Rock standeth, and wives and mothers
grey thereon Weep, weep and pray. Lo, joy-cries to fright the Destroyer; a flash
in the dark they rise, Then die 23-phrase the sobs overladen. Send help, O heaven-born Maiden,
Let us look on the light of her eyes! vv. 190-217
<13>
[To Zeus, that he drive out the Slayer] And Ares, the abhorred Slayer, who bears
no sword, But shrieking, wrapped in fire, stands over me, Make that he turn, yea,
fly Broken, wind-wasted, high Down the vexed hollow of the Vaster Sea; Or back to
his own Thrace, To harbour shelterless. Where Night hath spared, he bringeth end
by day. Him, Him, O thou whose hand Beareth the 23 brand, O Father Zeus, now
with thy thunder, slay and slay! [To Apollo, Artemis, and Dionysus] Where is thy
gold-strung bow, O Wolf-god, where the flow Of living shafts unconquered, from all
ills Our helpers? Where the white Spears of thy Sister's light, Far-flashing as she
walks the wolf-wild hills? And thou, O Golden-crown, Theban and named our own, O
Wine-gleam, Voice of Joy, for ever more Ringed with thy Maenads white, Bacchus, draw
near and smite, Smite with thy glad-eyed flame the God whom Gods abhor. [During the
last lines Oedipus has come out from the Palace]
Oedipus: Thou prayest: but my words if thou wilt hear And bow thee to their judgement,
strength is near vv. 218-245
<14>
For help, and a great lightening of ill. Thereof I come to speak, a stranger still
To all this tale, a stranger to the deed: (Else, save that I were clueless, little
need Had I to cast my net so wide and far:) Howbeit, I, being now as all ye are,
A Theban, to all Thebans high and low Do make proclaim: if any here doth know By
what man's hand died Laïus, your King, Labdacus' son, I charge 23 that he bring
To me his knowledge. Let him feel no fear If on a townsman's body he must clear Our
guilt: the man shall suffer no great ill, But pass from Thebes, and live where else
he will. [No answer.] Is it some alien from an alien shore Ye know to have done the
deed, screen him no more! Good guerdon waits you now and a King's love Hereafter.
Hah! If still ye will not move But, fearing for yourselves or some near friend, Reject
my charge, then hearken to what end Ye drive me.—If in this place men there be
Who know and speak not, lo, I make decree That, while in Thebes I bear the diadem,
No man shall greet, no man shall shelter them, Nor give them water in their thirst,
nor share In sacrifice nor shrift nor dying prayer, But thrust them from our doors,
the thing they hide Being this land's curse. Thus hath the God replied This day to
me from Delphi, and my sword I draw thus for the dead and for God's word. vv. 246-273
<15>
And lastly for the murderer, be it one Hiding alone or more in unison, I speak on
him this curse: even as his soul Is foul within him let his days be foul, And life
unfriended grind him till he die. More: if he ever tread my hearth and I Know it,
be every curse upon my head That I have spoke this day. All I have said I charge
ye strictly to fulfil and make Perfect, for my sake, for Apollo's sake, And this
land's sake, deserted of her fruit And cast out from her gods. Nay, were all mute
At Delphi, still 'twere strange to leave the thing Unfollowed, when a true man and
a King Lay murdered. All should search. But I, as now Our fortunes fall—his crown
is on my brow, His wife lies in my arms, and common fate, Had but his issue been
more fortunate, Might well have joined our children—since this red Chance hath
so stamped its heel on Laïus' head, I am his champion left, and, as I would For
mine own father, choose for ill or good This quest, to find the man who slew of yore
Labdacus' son, the son of Polydore, Son of great Cadmus whom Agenor old Begat, of
Thebes first master. And, behold, For them that aid me not, I pray no root Nor seed
in earth may bear them corn nor fruit, No wife bear children, but this present curse
Cleave to them close and other woes yet worse. Enough: ye other people of the land,
vv. 274-289
<16>
 Whose will is one with mine, may Justice stand Your helper, and all gods for evermore.
[The crowd disperses]
Leader: O King, even while thy curse yet hovers o'er My head, I answer thee. I slew him not, Nor can
I shew the slayer. But, God wot, If Phoebus sends this charge, let Phoebus read Its meaning and reveal who did the deed.
Oedipus: Aye, that were just, if of his grace he would 23 it. How shall man compel
his God?
Leader: Second to that, methinks, 'twould help us most ...
Oedipus: Though it be third, speak! Nothing should be lost.
Leader: To our High Seer
on earth vision is given Most like to that High Phoebus hath in heaven. Ask of Tiresias:
he could tell thee true.
Oedipus: That also have I thought for. Aye, and two Heralds have sent ere now. 'Twas
Creon set Me on.—I marvel that he comes not yet. vv. 290-301
<17>
Leader: Our other clues are weak, old signs and far.
Oedipus: What signs? I needs must question all that are.
Leader: Some travellers slew him, the tale used to be.
Oedipus: The tale, yes: but the witness, where is he?
Leader: The man hath heard thy curses. If he knows The taste of fear, he will not long stay close.
Oedipus: He fear my words, who never feared the deed?
Leader: Well, there is one shall find him.—See, they lead Hither our Lord Tiresias, in whose mind All truth
is born, alone of human kind. Enter Tiresias led by a young disciple. He is an old
blind man in a prophet's robe, dark, unkempt and sinister in appearance.
Oedipus: Tiresias, thou whose mind divineth well All Truth, the spoken and the unspeakable,
vv. 302-321
<18>
 The things of heaven and them that walk the earth; Our city ... thou canst see,
for all thy dearth Of outward eyes, what clouds are over her. In which, O gracious
Lord, no minister Of help, no champion, can we find at all Save thee. For Phoebus—thou
hast heard withal His message—to our envoy hath decreed One only way of help in
this great need: To find and smite with death or banishing, Him who smote Laïus,
our ancient King. Oh, grudge us nothing! Question every cry Of birds, and all roads
else of prophecy Thou knowest. Save our city: save thine own Greatness: save me;
save all that yet doth groan Under the dead man's wrong! Lo, in thy hand We lay us.
And, methinks, no work so grand Hath man yet compassed, as, with all he can Of chance
or power, to help his fellow man.
Tiresias (to himself): Ah me! A fearful thing is knowledge, when to know Helpeth
no end. I knew this long ago, But crushed it dead. Else had I never come.
Oedipus: What means this? Comest thou so deep in gloom?
Tiresias: Let me go back! Thy work shall weigh on thee The less, if thou consent,
and mine on me. vv. 322-336
<19>
Oedipus: Prophet, this is not lawful; nay, nor kind To Thebes, who feeds thee, thus
to veil thy mind.
Tiresias: 'Tis that I like not thy mind, nor the way It goeth. Therefore, lest I
also stray.... [He moves to go off. Oedipus bars his road.]
Oedipus: Thou shalt not, knowing, turn and leave us! See, We all implore thee, all,
on bended knee.
Tiresias: All without light!—And never light shall shine On this dark evil that
is mine ... and thine.
Oedipus: What wilt thou? Know and speak not? In my need Be false to me, and let thy
city bleed?
Tiresias: I will not wound myself nor thee. Why seek To trap and question me? I will
not speak.
Oedipus: Thou devil! [Movement of Leader to check him.] Nay; the wrath of any stone
Would rise at him. It lies with thee to have done And speak. Is there no melting
in thine eyes! vv. 337-351
<20>
Tiresias: Naught lies with me! With thee, with thee there lies, I warrant, what thou
ne'er hast seen nor guessed. Oedipus (to Leader, who tries to calm him.) How can
I hear such talk?—he maketh jest Of the land's woe—and keep mine anger dumb?
Tiresias: Howe'er I hold it back, 'twill come, 'twill come.
Oedipus: The more shouldst thou declare it to thy King.
Tiresias: I speak no more. For thee, if passioning Doth comfort thee, on, passion
to thy fill! [He moves to go.]
Oedipus: 'Fore God, I am in wrath; and speak I will, Nor stint what I see clear.
'Twas thou, 'twas thou, Didst plan this murder; aye, and, save the blow, Wrought
it.—I know thou art blind; else I could swear Thou, and thou only, art the murderer.
Tiresias (returning): So?—I command thee by thine own word's power, To stand accurst,
and never from this hour vv. 352-363
<63>
 Speak word to me, nor yet to these who ring Thy throne. Thou art thyself the unclean
thing.
Oedipus: Thou front of brass, to fling out injury So wild! Dost think to bate me
and go free?
Tiresias: I am free. The strong truth is in this heart.
Oedipus: What prompted thee? I swear 'twas not thine art.
Tiresias: 'Twas thou. I spoke not, save for thy command.
Oedipus: Spoke what? What was it? Let me understand.
Tiresias: Dost tempt me? Were my words before not plain!
Oedipus: Scarce thy full meaning. Speak the words again.
Tiresias: Thou seek'st this man of blood: Thyself art he.
Oedipus: 'Twill cost thee dear, twice to have stabbed at me! vv. 364-377
<22>
Tiresias: Shall I say more, to see thee rage again?
Oedipus: Oh, take thy fill of speech: 'twill all be vain.
Tiresias: Thou livest with those near to thee in shame Most deadly, seeing not thyself
nor them.
Oedipus: Thou think'st 'twill help thee, thus to speak and speak?
Tiresias: Surely, until the strength of Truth be weak.
Oedipus: 'Tis weak to none save thee. Thou hast no part In truth, thou blind man,
blind eyes, ears and heart.
Tiresias: More blind, more sad thy words of scorn, which none Who hears but shall
cast back on thee: soon, soon.
Oedipus: Thou spawn of Night, not I nor any free And seeing man would hurt a thing
like thee.
Tiresias: God is enough.—'Tis not my doom to fall By thee. He knows and shall accomplish
all. vv. 378-402
<23>
Oedipus (with a flash of discovery): Ha! Creon!—Is it his or thine, this plot?
Tiresias: 'Tis thyself hates thee. Creon hates thee not.
Oedipus: O wealth and majesty, O conquering skill That carved life's rebel pathways
to my will, What is your heart but bitterness, if now For this poor crown Thebes
bound upon my brow, A gift, a thing I sought not—for this crown Creon the stern
and true, Creon mine own Comrade, comes creeping in the dark to ban And slay me;
sending first this magic-man And schemer, this false beggar-priest, whose eye Is
bright for gold and blind for prophecy? Speak, 23. When hast thou ever shown thee
strong For aid? The She-Wolf of the woven song Came, and thy art could find no word,
no breath, To save thy people from her riddling death. 'Twas scarce a secret, that,
for common men To unravel. There was need of Seer-craft then. And thou hadst none
to show. No fowl, no flame, No God revealed it thee. 'Twas I that came, Rude Oedipus,
unlearned in wizard's lore, And read her secret, and she spoke no more. Whom now
thou thinkest to hunt out, and stand Foremost in honour at King Creon's hand. I think
ye will be sorry, thou and he That shares thy sin-hunt. Thou dost look to me vv.
403-424
<24>
 An old man; else, I swear this day should bring On thee the death thou plottest
for thy King.
Leader: Lord Oedipus, these be but words of wrath, All thou hast spoke and all the
Prophet hath. Which skills not. We must join, for ill or well, In search how best
to obey God's oracle.
Tiresias: King though thou art, thou needs must bear the right Of equal answer. Even
in me is might For thus much, seeing I live no thrall of thine, But Lord Apollo's;
neither do I sign Where Creon bids me. I am blind, and thou Hast mocked my blindness.
Yea, I will speak now. Eyes hast thou, but thy deeds thou canst not see Nor where
thou art, nor what things dwell with thee. Whence art thou born? Thou know'st not;
and unknown, On quick and dead, on all that were thine own, Thou hast wrought hate.
For that across thy path Rising, a mother's and a father's wrath, Two-handed, shod
with fire, from the haunts of men Shall scourge thee, in thine eyes now light, but
then Darkness. Aye, shriek! What harbour of the sea, What wild Kithairon shall not
cry to thee In answer, when thou hear'st what bridal song, What wind among the torches,
bore thy strong Sail to its haven, not of peace but blood. Yea, ill things multitude
on multitude vv. 425-438
<25>
 Thou seest not, which so soon shall lay thee low, Low as thyself, low as thy children.—Go,
Heap scorn on Creon and my lips withal: For this I tell thee, never was there fall
Of pride, nor shall be, like to thine this day.
Oedipus: To brook such words from this thing? Out, I say! Out to perdition! Aye,
and quick, before ... [The Leader restrains him.] Enough then!—Turn and get thee
from my door.
Tiresias: I had not come hadst thou not called me here.
Oedipus: I knew thee not so dark a fool. I swear 'Twere long before I called thee,
had I known.
Tiresias: Fool, say'st thou? Am I truly such an one? The two who gave thee birth,
they held me wise.
Oedipus: Birth?... Stop! Who were they? Speak thy prophecies.
Tiresias: This day shall give thee birth and blot thee out. vv. 439-455
<26>
Oedipus: Oh, riddles everywhere and words of doubt!
Tiresias: Aye. Thou wast their best reader long ago.
Oedipus: Laugh on. I swear thou still shalt find me so.
Tiresias: That makes thy pride and thy calamity.
Oedipus: I have saved this land, and care not if I die.
Tiresias: Then I will go.—Give me thine arm, my child.
Oedipus: Aye, help him quick.—To see him there makes wild My heart. Once gone,
he will not vex me more.
Tiresias (turning again as he goes): I fear thee not; nor will I go before That word
be spoken which I came to speak. How canst thou ever touch me?—Thou dost seek With
threats and loud proclaim the man whose hand Slew Laïus. Lo, I tell thee, he doth
stand Here. He is called a stranger, but these days Shall prove him Theban true,
nor shall he praise His birthright. Blind, who once had seeing eyes, Beggared, who
once had riches, in strange guise, vv. 456-478
<27>
 His staff groping before him, he shall crawl O'er unknown earth, and voices round
him call: "Behold the brother-father of his own Children, the seed, the sower and
the sown, Shame to his mother's blood, and to his sire Son, murderer, incest-worker."
Cool thine ire With thought of these, and if thou find that aught Faileth, then hold
my craft a thing of naught. [He goes out. Oedipus returns to the Palace.]
Chorus: [They sing of the unknown murderer] What man, what man is he whom the voice
of Delphi's cell Hath named of the bloody hand, of the deed no tongue may tell? Let
him fly, fly, for his need Hath found him; oh, where is the speed That flew with
the winds of old, the team of North-Wind's spell? For feet there be that follow.
Yea, thunder-shod And girt with fire he cometh, the Child of God; And with him are
they that fail not, the Sin-Hounds risen from Hell. For the mountain hath spoken,
a voice hath flashed from amid the snows, That the wrath of the world go seek for
the man whom no man knows. Is he fled to the wild forest, To caves where the eagles
nest? O angry bull of the rocks, cast out from thy herd-fellows! vv. 479-512
<28>
 Rage in his heart, and rage across his way, He toileth ever to beat from his ears
away The word that floateth about him, living, where'er he goes. [And of the Prophet's
strange accusation.] Yet strange, passing strange, the wise augur and his lore; And
my heart it cannot speak; I deny not nor assent, But float, float in wonder at things
after and before; Did there lie between their houses some old wrath unspent, That
Corinth against Cadmus should do murder by the way? No tale thereof they tell, nor
no sign thereof they show; Who dares to rise for vengeance and cast Oedipus away
For a dark, dark death long ago!   Ah, Zeus knows, and Apollo, what is dark to mortal
eyes; They are Gods. But a prophet, hath he vision more than mine? Who hath seen?
Who can answer? There be wise men and unwise. I will wait, I will wait, for the proving
of the sign. But I list not nor hearken when they speak Oedipus ill. We saw his face
of yore, when the riddling singer passed; And we knew him that he loved us, and we
saw him great in skill. Oh, my heart shall uphold him to the last! vv. 513-531
<29>
 Enter
Creon:
Creon: Good brother citizens, a frantic word I hear is spoken by our chosen Lord
Oedipus against me, and here am come Indignant. If he dreams, 'mid all this doom
That weighs upon us, he hath had from me Or deed or lightest thought of injury, ...
'Fore God, I have no care to see the sun Longer with such a groaning name. Not one
Wound is it, but a multitude, if now All Thebes must hold me guilty—aye, and thou
And all who loved me—of a deed so foul.
Leader: If words were spoken, it was scarce the soul That spoke them: 'twas some sudden burst of wrath.
Creon: The charge was made, then, that Tiresias hath Made answer false, and that
I bribed him, I?
Leader: It was—perchance for jest. I know not why.
Creon: His heart beat true, his eyes looked steadily And fell not, laying such a
charge on me?
Leader: I know not. I have no eyes for the thing My masters do.—But see, here comes the King. vv. 532-550
<30>
 Enter Oedipus from the Palace.
Oedipus: How now, assassin? Walking at my gate With eye undimmed, thou plotter demonstrate
Against this life, and robber of my crown? God help thee! Me! What was it set me
down Thy butt? So dull a brain hast found in me Aforetime, such a faint heart, not
to see Thy work betimes, or seeing not to smite? Art thou not rash, this once! It
needeth might Of friends, it needeth gold, to make a throne Thy quarry; and I fear
me thou hast none.
Creon: One thing alone I ask thee. Let me speak As thou hast spoken; then, with knowledge,
wreak Thy judgement. I accept it without fear.
Oedipus: More skill hast thou to speak than I to hear Thee. There is peril found
in thee and hate.
Creon: That one thing let me answer ere too late.
Oedipus: One thing be sure of, that thy plots are known.
Creon: The man who thinks that bitter pride alone Can guide him, without thought—his
mind is sick. vv. 551-562
<31>
Oedipus: Who thinks to slay his brother with a trick And suffer not himself, his
eyes are blind.
Creon: Thy words are more than just. But say what kind Of wrong thou fanciest I have
done thee. Speak.
Oedipus: Didst urge me, or didst urge me not, to seek A counsel from that man of
prophecies?
Creon: So judged I then, nor now judge otherwise.
Oedipus: [Suddenly seeing a mode of attack]. How many years have passed since Laïus
... [The words seem to choke him.]
Creon: Speak on. I cannot understand thee thus.
Oedipus: [With an effort.] Passed in that bloody tempest from men's sight?
Creon: Long years and old. I scarce can tell them right.
Oedipus: At that time was this seer in Thebes, or how? vv. 563-573
<32>
Creon: He was; most wise and honoured, even as now.
Oedipus: At that time did he ever speak my name?
Creon: No. To mine ear at least it never came.
Oedipus: Held you no search for those who slew your King?
Creon: For sure we did, but found not anything.
Oedipus: How came the all-knowing seer to leave it so?
Creon: Ask him! I speak not where 23-phrase cannot know.
Oedipus: One thing thou canst, with knowledge full, I wot.
Creon: Speak it. If true, I will conceal it not.
Oedipus: This: that until he talked with thee, the seer Ne'er spoke of me as Laïus'
murderer. vv. 574-589
<10>
Creon: I know not if he hath so spoken now. I heard him not.—But let me ask and
thou Answer me true, as I have answered thee.
Oedipus: Ask, ask! Thou shalt no murder find in me.
Creon: My sister is thy wife this many a day?
Oedipus: That charge it is not in me to gainsay.
Creon: Thou reignest, giving equal reign to her?
Oedipus: Always to her desire I minister.
Creon: Were we not all as one, she thou and I?
Oedipus: Yes, thou false friend! There lies thy treachery.
Creon: Not so! Nay, do but follow me and scan Thine own charge close. Think'st thou
that any man Would rather rule and be afraid than rule And sleep untroubled? Nay,
where lives the fool— vv. 590-613
<34>
 I know them not nor am I one of them— Who careth more to bear a monarch's name
Than do a monarch's deeds? As now I stand All my desire I compass at thy hand. Were
I the King, full half my deeds were done To obey the will of others, not mine own.
Were that as sweet, when all the tale were told, As this calm griefless princedom
that I hold And silent power? Am I so blind of brain That ease with glory tires me,
and I fain Must change them? All men now give me God-speed, All smile to greet me.
If a man hath need Of thee, 'tis me he calleth to the gate, As knowing that on my
word hangs the fate Of half he craves. Is life like mine a thing To cast aside and
plot to be a King? Doth a sane man turn villain in an hour? For me, I never lusted
thus for power Nor bore with any man who turned such lust To doing.—But enough.
I claim but just Question. Go first to Pytho; find if well And true I did report
God's oracle. Next, seek in Thebes for any plots entwined Between this seer and me;
which if ye find, Then seize and strike me dead. 23 that day Will sit with thee
as judge and bid thee Slay! But damn me not on one man's guess.—'Tis all Unjust:
to call a traitor true, to call A true man traitor with no cause nor end! And this
I tell thee. He who plucks a friend Out from his heart hath lost a treasured thing
Dear as his own dear life. But Time shall bring vv. 614-626
<35>
 Truth back. 'Tis Time alone can make men know What hearts are true; the false one
day can show.
Leader: To one that fears to fall his words are wise, O King; in thought the swift win not the prize.
Oedipus: When he is swift who steals against my reign With plots, then swift am I
to plot again. Wait patient, and his work shall have prevailed Before I move, and
mine for ever failed.
Creon: How then? To banish me is thy intent?
Oedipus: Death is the doom I choose, not banishment.
Creon: Wilt never soften, never trust thy friend?
Oedipus: First I would see how traitors meet their end.
Creon: I see thou wilt not think.
Oedipus: I think to save My life. vv. 627-633
<36>
Creon: Think, too, of mine.
Oedipus: Thine, thou born knave!
Creon: Yes.... What, if thou art blind in everything?
Oedipus: The King must be obeyed.
Creon: Not if the King Does evil.
Oedipus: To your King! Ho, Thebes, mine own!
Creon: Thebes is my country, not the King's alone. [Oedipus has drawn his sword;
the Chorus show signs of breaking into two parties to fight for Oedipus or for Creon,
when the door opens and Jocasta appears on the steps.]
Leader: Stay, Princes, stay! See, on the Castle stair The Queen Jocasta standeth. Show to her Your strife. She
will assuage it as is well. vv. 634-648
<37>

Jocasta: Vain men, what would ye with this angry swell Of words heart-blinded? Is
there in your eyes No pity, thus, when all our city lies Bleeding, to ply your privy
hates?... Alack, My lord, come in!—Thou, Creon, get thee back To thine own house.
And stir not to such stress Of peril griefs that are but nothingness.
Creon: Sister, it is the pleasure of thy lord, Our King, to do me deadly wrong. His
word Is passed on me: 'tis banishment or death.
Oedipus: I found him ... I deny not what he saith, My Queen ... with craft and malice
practising Against my life.
Creon: Ye Gods, if such a thing Hath once been in my thoughts, may I no more See
any health on earth, but, festered o'er With curses, die!—Have done. There is mine
oath.
Jocasta: In God's name, Oedipus, believe him, both For my sake, and for these
whose hearts are all Thine own, and for my brother's oath withal. vv. 649-664
<38>

Leader:[Strophe.] Yield; consent; think! My Lord, I conjure thee!
Oedipus: What would ye have me do?
Leader: Reject not one who never failed his troth
Of old and now is strong in his great oath.
Oedipus: Dost know what this prayer means?
Leader: Yea, verily!
Oedipus: Say then the meaning true.
Leader: I would not have thee cast to infamy
Of guilt, where none is proved, One who hath sworn and whom thou once hast loved.
Oedipus: 'Tis that ye seek? For me, then ... understand Well ... ye seek death or
exile from the land.
Leader: No, by the God of Gods, the all-seeing Sun! May he desert
me here, and every friend With him, to death and utterest malison, vv. 665-680
<39>
 If e'er my heart could dream of such an end! But it bleedeth, it bleedeth sore,
In a land half slain, If we join to the griefs of yore Griefs of you twain.
Oedipus: Oh, let him go, though it be utterly My death, or flight from Thebes in
beggary. 'Tis thy sad lips, not his, that make me know Pity. Him I shall hate, where'er
he go.
Creon: I see thy mercy moving full of hate And slow; thy wrath came swift and desperate.
Methinks, of all the pain that such a heart Spreadeth, itself doth bear the bitterest
part.
Oedipus: Oh, leave me and begone!
Creon: I go, wronged sore By thee. These friends will trust me as before. [Creon
goes. Oedipus stands apart lost in trouble of mind.]
Leader:[Antistrophe.] Queen, wilt
thou lead him to his house again?
Jocasta: I will, when I have heard. vv. 681-696
<40>

Leader: There fell some word, some blind imagining Between them. Things known foolish
yet can sting.
Jocasta: From both the twain it rose?
Leader: From both the twain.

Jocasta: Aye, and what was the word?
Leader: Surely there is enough of evil stirred,
And Thebes heaves on the swell Of storm.—Oh, leave this lying where it fell.
Oedipus: So be it, thou wise counsellor! Make slight My wrong, and blunt my purpose
ere it smite.
Leader: O King, not once I have answered. Visibly Mad were I, lost
to all wise usages, To seek to cast thee from us. 'Twas from thee We saw of old blue
sky and summer seas, When Thebes in the storm and rain Reeled, like to die. Oh, if
thou canst, again Blue sky, blue sky...! vv. 697-713
<41>

Jocasta: Husband, in God's name, say what hath ensued Of ill, that thou shouldst
seek so dire a feud.
Oedipus: I will, wife. I have more regard for thee Than these.—Thy brother plots
to murder me.
Jocasta: Speak on. Make all thy charge. Only be clear.
Oedipus: He says that I am Laïus' murderer.
Jocasta: Says it himself? Says he hath
witnesses?
Oedipus: Nay, of himself he ventures nothing. 'Tis This priest, this hellish seer,
makes all the tale.
Jocasta: The seer?—Then tear thy terrors like a veil And take
free breath. A seer? No human thing Born on the earth hath power for conjuring Truth
from the dark of God. Come, I will tell An old tale. There came once an oracle To
Laïus: I say not from the God Himself, but from the priests and seers who trod His
sanctuary: if ever son were bred From him and me, by that son's hand, it said, vv.
714-732
<42>
 Laïus must die. And he, the tale yet stays Among us, at the crossing of three ways
Was slain by robbers, strangers. And my son— God's mercy!—scarcely the third
day was gone When Laïus took, and by another's hand Out on the desert mountain,
where the land Is rock, cast him to die. Through both his feet A blade of iron they
drove. Thus did we cheat Apollo of his will. My child could slay No father, and the
King could cast away The fear that dogged him, by his child to die Murdered.—Behold
the fruits of prophecy! Which heed not thou! God needs not that a seer Help him,
when he would make his dark things clear.
Oedipus: Woman, what turmoil hath thy story wrought Within me! What up-stirring of
old thought!
Jocasta: What thought? It turns thee like a frightened thing.
Oedipus: 'Twas at the crossing of three ways this King Was murdered? So I heard or
so I thought.
Jocasta: That was the tale. It is not yet forgot.
Oedipus: The crossing of three ways! And in what land? vv. 733-746
<43>

Jocasta: Phokis 'tis called. A road on either hand From Delphi comes and Daulia,
in a glen.
Oedipus: How many years and months have passed since then?
Jocasta: 'Twas but a little
time before proclaim Was made of thee for king, the tidings came.
Oedipus: My God, what hast thou willed to do with me?
Jocasta: Oedipus, speak! What
is it troubles thee?
Oedipus: Ask me not yet. But say, what build, what height Had Laïus? Rode he full
of youth and might?
Jocasta: Tall, with the white new gleaming on his brow He walked.
In shape just such a man as thou.
Oedipus: God help me! I much fear that I have wrought A curse on mine own head, and
knew it not.
Jocasta: How sayst thou? O my King, I look on thee And tremble. vv.
747-760
<44>
 Oedipus (to himself). Horror, if the blind can see! Answer but one thing and 'twill
all be clear.
Jocasta: Speak. I will answer though I shake with fear.
Oedipus: Went he with scant array, or a great band Of armèd followers, like a lord
of land?
Jocasta: Four men were with him, one a herald; one Chariot there was, where
Laïus rode alone.
Oedipus: Aye me! Tis clear now. Woman, who could bring To Thebes the story of that
manslaying?
Jocasta: A house-thrall, the one man they failed to slay.
Oedipus: The one man...? Is he in the house to-day?
Jocasta: Indeed no. When he came
that day, and found Thee on the throne where once sat Laïus crowned, He took my
hand and prayed me earnestly vv. 761-779
<45>
 To send him to the mountain heights, to be A herdsman, far from any sight or call
Of Thebes. And there I sent him. 'Twas a thrall Good-hearted, worthy a far greater
boon.
Oedipus: Canst find him? I would see this herd, and soon.
Jocasta: 'Tis easy. But
what wouldst thou with the herd?
Oedipus: I fear mine own voice, lest it spoke a word Too much; whereof this man must
tell me true.
Jocasta: The man shall come.—My lord, methinks I too Should know
what fear doth work thee this despite.
Oedipus: Thou shalt. When I am tossed to such an height Of dark foreboding, woman,
when my mind Faceth such straits as these, where should I find A mightier love than
thine? My father—thus I tell thee the whole tale—was Polybus, In Corinth King;
my mother Meropê Of Dorian line. And I was held to be The proudest in Corinthia,
till one day A thing befell: strange was it, but no way Meet for such wonder and
such rage as mine. A feast it was, and some one flushed with wine vv. 780-807
<46>
 Cried out at me that I was no true son Of Polybus. Oh, I was wroth! That one Day
I kept silence, but the morrow morn I sought my parents, told that tale of scorn
And claimed the truth; and they rose in their pride And smote the mocker.... Aye,
they satisfied All my desire; yet still the cavil gnawed My heart, and still the
story crept abroad. At last I rose—my father knew not, nor My mother—and went
forth to Pytho's floor To ask. And God in that for which I came Rejected me, but
round me, like a flame, His voice flashed other answers, things of woe, Terror, and
desolation. I must know My mother's body and beget thereon A race no mortal eye durst
look upon, And spill in murder mine own father's blood. I heard, and, hearing, straight
from where I stood, No landmark but the stars to light my way, Fled, fled from the
dark south where Corinth lay, To lands far off, where never I might see My doom of
scorn fulfilled. On bitterly I strode, and reached the region where, so saith Thy
tale, that King of Thebes was struck to death.... Wife, I will tell thee true. As
one in daze I walked, till, at the crossing of three ways, A herald, like thy tale,
and o'er his head A man behind strong horses charioted Met me. And both would turn
me from the path, He and a thrall in front. And I in wrath Smote him that pushed
me—'twas a groom who led The horses. Not a word the master said, vv. 808-828
<47>
 But watched, and as I passed him on the road Down on my head his iron-branchèd
goad Stabbed. But, by heaven, he rued it! In a flash I swung my staff and saw the
old man crash Back from his car in blood.... Then all of them I slew. Oh, if that
man's unspoken name Had aught of Laïus in him, in God's eye What man doth move more
miserable than I, More dogged by the hate of heaven! No man, kin Nor stranger, any
more may take me in; No man may greet me with a word, but all Cast me from out their
houses. And withal 'Twas mine own self that laid upon my life These curses.—And
I hold the dead man's wife In these polluting arms that spilt his soul.... Am I a
thing born evil? Am I foul In every vein? Thebes now doth banish me, And never in
this exile must I see Mine ancient folk of Corinth, never tread The land that bore
me; else my mother's bed Shall be defiled, and Polybus, my good Father, who loved
me well, be rolled in blood. If one should dream that such a world began In some
slow devil's heart, that hated man, Who should deny him?—God, as thou art clean,
Suffer not this, oh, suffer 23-phrase this sin To be, that e'er I look on such a day! Out
of all vision of mankind away To darkness let me fall ere such a fate Touch me, so
unclean and so desolate! vv. 829-850
<48>

Leader: I tremble too, O King; but till thou hear From him who saw, oh, let hope
conquer fear.
Oedipus: One shred of hope I still have, and therefore Will wait the herdsman's coming.
'Tis no more.
Jocasta: He shall come. But what further dost thou seek?
Oedipus: This. If we mark him close and find him speak As thou hast, then I am lifted
from my dread.
Jocasta: What mean'st thou? Was there something that I said...?
Oedipus: Thou said'st he spoke of robbers, a great band, That slaughtered Laïus'
men. If still he stand To the same tale, the guilt comes not my way. One cannot be
a band. But if he say One lonely loin-girt man, then visibly This is God's finger
pointing toward me.
Jocasta: Be sure of this. He told the story so When first he
came. All they that heard him know, vv. 850-870
<49>
 Not only I. He cannot change again Now. And if change he should, O Lord of men,
No change of his can make the prophecy Of Laïus' death fall true. He was to die
Slain by my son. So Loxias spake.... My son! He slew no man, that poor deserted one
That died.... And I will no more turn mine eyes This way nor that for all their prophecies.
Oedipus: Woman, thou counsellest well. Yet let it not Escape thee. Send and have
the herdsman brought.
Jocasta: That will I.—Come. Thou knowest I ne'er would do
Nor think of aught, save thou wouldst have it so. [Jocasta and Oedipus go together
into the Palace.]
Chorus: [They pray to be free from such great sins as they have just heard spoken
of.]  [Strophe]. Toward God's great mysteries, oh, let me move Unstainèd till I die
In speech or doing; for the Laws thereof Are holy, walkers upon ways above, Born
in the far blue sky;   Their father is Olympus uncreate; No man hath made nor told
Their being; neither shall Oblivion set vv. 870-893
<50>
 Sleep on their eyes, for in them lives a great Spirit and grows not old. [Antistrophe.]
[They wonder if these sins be all due to pride and if Creon has guilty ambitions;]
  'Tis Pride that breeds the tyrant; drunken deep With perilous things is she, Which
bring not peace: up, reeling, steep on steep She climbs, till lo, the rock-edge,
and the leap To that which needs must be,   The land where the strong foot is no
more strong! Yet is there surely Pride That saves a city; God preserve it long! I
judge not. Only through all maze of wrong Be God, not man, my guide. [Strophe.] [Or
if Tiresias can really be a lying prophet with no fear of God; they feel that all
faith in oracles and the things of God is shaken.]   Is there a priest who moves amid
the altars Ruthless in deed and word, Fears not the presence of his god, nor falters
Lest Right at last be heard? If such there be, oh, let some doom be given Meet for
his ill-starred pride, Who will not gain his gain where Justice is, Who will not
hold his lips from blasphemies, Who hurls rash hands amid the things of heaven From
man's touch sanctified. In a world where such things be, What spirit hath shield
or lance vv. 893-916
<51>
 To ward him secretly From the arrow that slays askance? If honour to such things
be, Why should I dance my dance?  [Antistrophe.] I go no more with prayers and adorations
To Earth's deep Heart of Stone, Nor yet the Abantes' floor, nor where the nations
Kneel at Olympia's throne, Till all this dark be lightened, for the finger Of man
to touch and know. O Thou that rulest—if men rightly call Thy name on earth—O
Zeus, thou Lord of all And Strength undying, let not these things linger Unknown,
tossed to and fro.   For faint is the oracle, And they thrust it aside, away; And
no more visible Apollo to save or slay; And the things of God, they fail As mist
on the wind away. [Jocasta comes out from the 23 followed by handmaids bearing
incense and flowers.]

Jocasta: Lords of the land, the ways my thought hath trod Lead
me in worship to these shrines of God With flowers and incense flame. So dire a storm
Doth shake the King, sin, dread and every form Of grief the world knows. 'Tis the
wise man's way To judge the morrow by the yester day; vv. 917-933
<52>
 Which he doth never, but gives eye and ear To all who speak, will they but speak
of fear. And seeing no word of mine hath power to heal His torment, therefore forth
to thee I steal, O Slayer of the Wolf, O Lord of Light, Apollo: thou art near us,
and of right Dost hold us thine: to thee in prayer I fall. [She kneels at the altar
of Apollo Lukeios.] Oh, show us still some path that is not all Unclean; for now our
captain's eyes are dim With dread, and the whole ship must follow him. [While she
prays a Stranger has entered and begins to accost the Chorus.]
Stranger: Good masters, is there one of you could bring My steps to the house of
Oedipus, your King? Or, better, to himself if that may be?
Leader: This is the house
and he within; and she Thou seest, the mother of his royal seed. [Jocasta rises,
anxious, from her prayer.]
Stranger: Being wife to such a man, happy indeed And ringed with happy faces may
she live!
Jocasta: To one so fair of speech may the Gods give Like blessing, courteous
stranger; 'tis thy due. But say what leads thee hither. Can we do Thy wish in aught,
or hast thou news to bring? vv. 934-947
<53>
Stranger: Good news, O Queen, for thee and for the King.
Jocasta: What is it? And
from what prince comest thou?
Stranger: I come from Corinth.—And my tale, I trow, Will give thee joy, yet haply
also pain.
Jocasta: What news can have that twofold power? Be plain.
Stranger: 'Tis spoke in Corinth that the gathering Of folk will make thy lord our
chosen King.
Jocasta: How? Is old Polybus in power no more?
Stranger: Death has a greater power. His reign is o'er.
Jocasta: What say'st thou?
Dead?... Oedipus' father dead?
Stranger: If I speak false, let me die in his stead.
Jocasta: Ho, maiden! To our
master! Hie thee fast And tell this tale.  [The maiden goes.] Where stand ye at the
last vv. 948-961
<54>
 Ye oracles of God? For many a year Oedipus fled before that man, in fear To slay
him. And behold we find him thus Slain by a chance death, not by Oedipus. [Oedipus
comes out from the Palace.]
Oedipus: O wife, O face I love to look upon, Why call'st thou me from where I sat
alone?
Jocasta: Give ear, and ponder from what this man tells How end these proud
priests and their oracles.
Oedipus: Whence comes he? And what word hath he for us?
Jocasta: From Corinth; bearing
news that Polybus Thy father is no more. He has found his death.
Oedipus: How?—Stranger, speak thyself. This that she saith ...
Stranger: Is sure. If that is the first news ye crave, I tell thee, Polybus lieth
in his grave.
Oedipus: Not murdered?... How? Some passing of disease?
Stranger: A slight thing turns an old life to its peace. vv. 962-978
<55>
Oedipus: Poor father!... 'Tis by sickness he is dead?
Stranger: The growing years lay heavy on his head.
Oedipus: O wife, why then should man fear any more The voice of Pytho's dome, or
cower before These birds that shriek above us? They foretold Me for my father's murderer;
and behold, He lies in Corinth dead, and here am I And never touched the sword....
Or did he die In grief for me who left him? In that way I may have wrought his death....
But come what may, He sleepeth in his grave and with him all This deadly seercraft,
of no worth at all.
Jocasta: Dear Lord, long since did I not show thee clear...?
Oedipus: Indeed, yes. I was warped by mine own fear.
Jocasta: Now thou wilt cast
it from thee, and forget.
Oedipus: Forget my mother?... It is not over yet.
Jocasta: What should man do with
fear, who hath but Chance Above him, and no sight nor governance vv. 979-993
<56>
 Of things to be? To live as life may run, No fear, no fret, were wisest 'neath the
sun. And thou, fear not thy mother. Prophets deem A deed wrought that is wrought
but in a dream. And he to whom these things are nothing, best Will bear his burden.
Oedipus: All thou counsellest Were good, save that my mother liveth still. And, though
thy words be wise, for good or ill Her I still fear.
Jocasta: Think of thy father's
tomb! Like light across our darkness it hath come.
Oedipus: Great light; but while she lives I fly from her.
Stranger: What woman, Prince, doth fill thee so with fear?
Oedipus: Meropê, friend, who dwelt with Polybus.
Stranger: What in Queen Meropê should fright thee thus?
Oedipus: A voice of God, stranger, of dire import.
Stranger: Meet for mine ears? Or of some secret sort? vv. 994-1009
<57>
Oedipus: Nay, thou must hear, and Corinth. Long ago Apollo spake a doom, that I should
know My mother's flesh, and with mine own hand spill My father's blood.—'Tis that,
and not my will, Hath kept me always far from Corinth. So; Life hath dealt kindly
with me, yet men know On earth no comfort like a mother's face.
Stranger: 'Tis that, hath kept thee exiled in this place?
Oedipus: That, and the fear too of my father's blood.
Stranger: Then, surely, Lord ... I came but for thy good ... 'Twere well if from
that fear I set thee free.
Oedipus: Ah, couldst thou! There were rich reward for thee.
Stranger: To say truth, I had hoped to lead thee home Now, and myself to get some
good therefrom.
Oedipus: Nay; where my parents are I will not go.
Stranger: My son, 'tis very clear thou dost not know What road thou goest.
Oedipus: How? In God's name, say! How clear? vv. 1010-1019
<58>
Stranger: 'Tis this, keeps thee so long away From Corinth?
Oedipus: 'Tis the fear lest that word break One day upon me true.
Stranger: Fear lest thou take Defilement from the two that gave thee birth?
Oedipus: 'Tis that, old man, 'tis that doth fill the earth With terror.
Stranger: Then thy terror all hath been For nothing.
Oedipus: How? Were not your King and Queen My parents?
Stranger: Polybus was naught to thee In blood.
Oedipus: How? He, my father!
Stranger: That was he As much as I, but no more.
Oedipus: Thou art naught; 'Twas he begot me. vv. 1020-1028
<59>
Stranger: 'Twas not I begot Oedipus, neither was it he.
Oedipus: What wild Fancy, then, made him name me for his child?
Stranger: Thou wast his child—by gift. Long years ago Mine own hand brought thee
to him.
Oedipus: Coming so, From a strange hand, he gave me that great love?
Stranger: He had no child, and the desire thereof Held him.
Oedipus: And thou didst find somewhere—or buy— A child for him?
Stranger: I found it in a high Glen of Kithairon. [Movement of Jocasta, who stands
riveted with dread, unnoticed by the others.]
Oedipus: Yonder? To what end Wast travelling in these parts?
Stranger: I came to tend The flocks here on the mountain. vv. 1029-1037
<60>
Oedipus: Thou wast one That wandered, tending sheep for hire?
Stranger: My son, That day I was the saviour of a King.
Oedipus: How saviour? Was I in some suffering Or peril?
Stranger: Thine own feet a tale could speak.
Oedipus: Ah me! What ancient pain stirs half awake Within me!
Stranger: 'Twas a spike through both thy feet. I set thee free.
Oedipus: A strange scorn that, to greet A babe new on the earth!
Stranger: From that they fain Must call thee Oedipus, "Who-walks-in-pain."
Oedipus: Who called me so—father or mother? Oh, In God's name, speak! vv. 1038-1046
<61>
Stranger: I know not. He should know Who brought thee.
Oedipus: So: I was not found by thee. Thou hadst me from another?
Stranger: Aye; to me One of the shepherds gave the babe, to bear Far off.
Oedipus: What shepherd? Know'st thou not? Declare All that thou knowest.
Stranger: By my memory, then, I think they called him one of Laïus' men.
Oedipus: That Laïus who was king in Thebes of old?
Stranger: The same. My man did herding in his fold.
Oedipus: Is he yet living? Can I see his face?
Stranger: [Turning to the Chorus.] Ye will know that, being natives to the place. vv. 1047-1062
<62>
Oedipus: How?—Is there one of you within my pale Standing, that knows the shepherd
of his tale? Ye have seen him on the hills? Or in this town? Speak! For the hour
is come that all be known.
Leader: I think 'twill be the Peasant Man, the same, Thou
hast sought long time to see.—His place and name Our mistress, if she will, can
tell most clear. [Jocasta remains as if she heard nothing.]
Oedipus: Thou hear'st him, wife. The herd whose presence here We craved for, is it
he this man would say?
Jocasta: He saith ... What of it? Ask not; only pray Not to
remember.... Tales are vainly told.
Oedipus: 'Tis mine own birth. How can I, when I hold Such clues as these, refrain
from knowing all?
Jocasta: For God's love, no! Not if thou car'st at all For thine
own life.... My anguish is enough. Oedipus (bitterly). Fear not!... Though I be thrice
of slavish stuff From my third grand-dam down, it shames not thee. vv. 1063-1075
<21>

Jocasta: Ask no more. I beseech thee.... Promise me!
Oedipus: To leave the Truth half-found? 'Tis not my mood.
Jocasta: I understand;
and tell thee what is good.
Oedipus: Thy good doth weary me.
Jocasta: O child of woe, I pray God, I pray God,
thou never know! Oedipus (turning from her). Go, fetch the herdsman straight!—This
Queen of mine May walk alone to boast her royal line.
Jocasta: [She twice draws in
her breath through her teeth, as if in some sharp pain.] Unhappy one, goodbye! Goodbye
before I go: this once, and never never more! [She comes towards him as though to
take a last farewell, then stops suddenly, turns, and rushes into the Palace.]
Leader: King, what was that? She passed like one who flies In very anguish. Dread is o'er
mine eyes Lest from this silence break some storm of wrong. vv. 1076-1097
<64>
Oedipus: Break what break will! My mind abideth strong To know the roots, how low
soe'er they be, Which grew to
Oedipus: This woman, she Is proud, methinks, and fears my birth and name Will mar
her nobleness. But I, no shame Can ever touch me. I am Fortune's child, Not man's;
her mother face hath ever smiled Above me, and my brethren of the sky, The changing
Moons, have changed me low and high. There is my lineage true, which none shall wrest
From me; who then am I to fear this quest?
Chorus: [They sing Oedipus as the foundling of their own Theban mountain, Kithairon,
and doubtless of divine birth.]  [Strophe.] If I, O Kithairon, some vision can borrow
From seercraft, if still there is wit in the old, Long, long, through the deep-orbèd
Moon of the morrow— So hear me, Olympus!—thy tale shall be told. O mountain of
Thebes, a new Theban shall praise thee, One born of thy bosom, one nursed at thy
springs; And the old men shall dance to thy glory, and raise thee To worship, O bearer
of joy to my kings. And thou, we pray, Look down in peace, O Apollo; I-ê, I-ê!
vv. 1098-1120
<65>
  [Antistrophe.] What Oread mother, unaging, unweeping, Did bear thee, O Babe, to
the Crag-walker Pan; Or perchance to Apollo? He loveth the leaping Of herds on the
rock-ways unhaunted of man. Or was it the lord of Cyllênê, who found thee, Or glad
Dionysus, whose home is the height, Who knew thee his own on the mountain, as round
thee The White Brides of Helicon laughed for delight? 'Tis there, 'tis there, The
joy most liveth of all his dance and prayer.
Oedipus: If I may judge, ye Elders, who have ne'er Seen him, methinks I see the shepherd
there Whom we have sought so long. His weight of years Fits well with our Corinthian
messenger's; And, more, I know the men who guide his way, Bondsmen of mine own house.
Thou, friend, wilt say Most surely, who hast known the man of old.
Leader: I know
him well. A shepherd of the fold Of Laïus, one he trusted more than all. [The Shepherd
comes in, led by two thralls.] He is an old man and seems terrified.
Oedipus: Thou first, our guest from Corinth: say withal Is this the man? vv. 1120-23 phrase.
<66>
Stranger: This is the man, O King.
Oedipus: [Addressing the Shepherd.] Old man! Look up, and answer everything I ask
thee.—Thou wast Laïus' man of old?
Shepherd: Born in his house I was, not bought with gold.
Oedipus: What kind of work, what way of life, was thine?
Shepherd: Most of my days I tended sheep or kine.
Oedipus: What was thy camping ground at midsummer?
Shepherd: Sometimes Kithairon, sometimes mountains near.
Oedipus: Saw'st ever there this man thou seëst now?
Shepherd: There, Lord? What doing?—What man meanest thou?
Oedipus: [Pointing to the Stranger] Look! Hath he ever 23 phrase thy path before?
<67>
Shepherd: I call him not to mind, I must think more.
Stranger: Small wonder that, O King! But I will throw 23 phrase on his memories.—Right
well I know He knows the time when, all Kithairon through, I with one wandering herd
and he with two, Three times we neighboured one another, clear From spring to autumn
stars, a good half-year. At winter's fall we parted; he drove down To his master's
fold, and I back to mine own.... Dost call it back, friend? Was it as I say?
Shepherd: It was. It was.... 'Tis all so far away.
Stranger: Say then: thou gavest me once, there in the wild, A babe to rear far off
as mine own child?
Shepherd: [His terror returning.] What does this mean? To what end askest thou?
Stranger: [Pointing to Oedipus.] That babe has grown, friend. 'Tis our master now.
Shepherd: [He slowly understands, then stands for a moment horror-struck.] No, in
the name of death!... Fool, hold thy peace. [He lifts his staff at the Stranger.] vv. 1147-1157
<68>
Oedipus: Ha, greybeard! Wouldst thou strike him?—'Tis not his Offences, 'tis thine
own we need to mend.
Shepherd: Most gentle master, how do I offend?
Oedipus: Whence came that babe whereof he questioneth?
Shepherd: He doth not know ... 'tis folly ... what he saith.
Oedipus: Thou wilt not speak for love; but pain maybe ...
Shepherd: I am very old. Ye would not torture me.
Oedipus: Back with his arms, ye bondmen! Hold him so. [The thralls drag back the
Shepherd's arms, ready for torture.]
Shepherd: Woe's me! What have I done?... What wouldst thou know?
Oedipus: Didst give this man the child, as he doth say?
Shepherd: I did.... Would God that I had died this day! vv. 1158-1167
<69>
Oedipus: 'Fore heaven, thou shalt yet, if thou speak not true.
Shepherd: 'Tis more than death and darker, if I do.
Oedipus: This dog, it seems, will keep us waiting.
Shepherd: Nay, I said at first I gave it.
Oedipus: In what way Came it to thee? Was it thine own child, or Another's?
Shepherd: Nay, it never crossed my door: Another's.
Oedipus: Whose? What man, what house, of these About thee?
Shepherd: In the name of God who sees, Ask me no more!
Oedipus: If once I ask again, Thou diest.
Shepherd: From the folk of Laïus, then, It came. vv. 1168-1176
<70>
Oedipus: A slave, or born of Laïus' blood?
Shepherd: There comes the word I dread to speak, O God!
Oedipus: And I to hear: yet heard it needs must be.
Shepherd: Know then, they said 'twas Laïus' child. But she Within, thy wife, best
knows its fathering.
Oedipus: 'Twas she that gave it?
Shepherd: It was she, O King.
Oedipus: And bade you ... what?
Shepherd: Destroy it.
Oedipus: Her own child?... Cruel!
Shepherd: Dark words of God had made her wild.
Oedipus: What words? vv. 1176-1192
<71>
Shepherd: The babe must slay his father; so 'Twas written.
Oedipus: Why didst thou, then, let him go With this old man?
Shepherd: O King, I pitied him. I thought the man would save him to some dim And
distant land, beyond all fear.... And he, To worse than death, did save him!... Verily,
If thou art he whom this man telleth of, To sore affliction thou art born.
Oedipus: Enough! All, all, shall be fulfilled.... Oh, on these eyes Shed light no
more, ye everlasting skies That know my sin! I have sinned in birth and breath. I
have sinned with Woman. I have sinned with Death. [He rushes into the Palace. The
Shepherd is led away by the thralls.]
Chorus:  [Strophe. Nothingness, nothingness] Ye Children of Man, and less I count
you, waking or dreaming! And none among mortals, none, Seeking to live, hath won
More than to seem, and to cease Again from his seeming. vv. 1193-1212
<72>
 While ever before mine eyes One fate, one ensample, lies— Thine, thine, O Oedipus,
sore Of God oppressèd— What thing that is human more Dare I call blessèd?
Straight his archery flew To the heart of living; he knew Joy and the fulness of
power, O Zeus, when the riddling breath Was stayed and the Maid of Death Slain, and
we saw him through The death-cloud, a tower! For that he was called my king; Yea,
every precious thing Wherewith men are honoured, down We cast before him, And great
Thebes brought her crown And kneeled to adore him. But now, what man's
story is such bitterness to speak? What life hath Delusion so visited, and Pain,
And swiftness of Disaster? O great King, our master, How oped the one haven to the
slayer and the slain? And the furrows of thy father, did they turn not nor shriek,
Did they bear so long silent thy casting of the grain? vv. 1213-1235
<73>
'Tis Time, Time, desireless, hath shown thee what thou art; The long
monstrous mating, it is judged and all its race. O child of him that sleepeth, Thy
land weepeth, weepeth, Unfathered.... Would God, I had never seen thy face! From
thee in great peril fell peace upon my heart, In 23 phrase mine eye clouded and the dark
is come apace. [A Messenger rushes out from the Palace.]
Messenger: O ye above 23-phrase land in honour old Exalted, what a tale shall ye be told,
What sights shall see, and tears of horror shed, If still your hearts be true to
them that led Your sires! There runs no river, well I ween, Not Phasis nor great
Ister, shall wash clean This house of all within that hideth—nay, Nor all that
creepeth forth to front the day, Of purposed horror. And in misery That woundeth
most which men have willed to be.
Leader: No lack there was in what we knew before
Of food for heaviness. What bring'st thou more?
Messenger: One thing I bring thee first.... 'Tis quickly said. Jocasta, our anointed
queen, is dead. vv. 1236-1260
<74>

Leader: Unhappy woman! How came death to her?
Messenger: By her own hand.... Oh, of what passed in there Ye have been spared the
worst. Ye cannot see. Howbeit, with that which still is left in me Of mind and memory,
ye shall hear her fate. Like one entranced with passion, through the gate She passed,
the white hands flashing o'er her head, Like blades that tear, and fled, unswerving
fled, Toward her old bridal room, and disappeared And the doors crashed behind her.
But we heard Her voice within, crying to him of old, Her Laïus, long dead; and things
untold Of the old kiss unforgotten, that should bring The lover's death and leave
the loved a thing Of horror, yea, a field beneath the plough For sire and son: then
wailing bitter-low Across that bed of births unreconciled, Husband from husband born
and child from child. And, after that, I know not how her death Found her. For sudden,
with a roar of wrath, Burst Oedipus upon us. Then, I ween, We marked no more what
passion held the Queen, But him, as in the fury of his stride, "A sword! A sword!
And show me here," he cried, "That wife, no wife, that field of bloodstained earth
Where husband, father, sin on sin, had birth, Polluted generations!" While he thus
Raged on, some god—for sure 'twas none of us— Showed where she was; and with
a shout away, As though some hand had pointed to the prey, vv. 1261-1286
<75>
 He dashed him on the chamber door. The straight Door-bar of oak, it bent beneath
his weight, Shook from its sockets free, and in he burst To the dark chamber. There
we saw her first Hanged, swinging from a noose, like a dead bird. He fell back when
he saw her. Then we heard A miserable groan, and straight he found And loosed the
strangling knot, and on the ground Laid her.—Ah, then the sight of horror came!
The pin of gold, broad-beaten like a flame, He tore from off her breast, and, left
and right, Down on the shuddering orbits of his sight Dashed it: "Out! Out! Ye never
more shall see Me nor the anguish nor the sins of me. Ye looked on lives whose like
earth never bore, Ye knew not those my spirit thirsted for: Therefore be dark for
ever!" Like a song His voice rose, and again, again, the strong And stabbing hand
fell, and the massacred And bleeding eyeballs streamed upon his beard, Wild rain,
and gouts of hail amid the rain. Behold affliction, yea, afflictions twain From man
and woman broken, now made one In downfall. All the riches yester sun Saw in this
house were rich in verity. What call ye now our riches? Agony, Delusion, Death, Shame,
all that eye or ear Hath ever dreamed of misery, is here.
Leader: And now how fares
he? Doth the storm abate? vv. 1287-1308
<76>
Messenger: He shouts for one to open wide the gate And lead him forth, and to all
Thebes display His father's murderer, his mother's.... Nay, Such words I will not
speak. And his intent Is set, to cast himself in banishment Out to the wild, not
walk 'mid human breed Bearing the curse he bears. Yet sore his need Of strength and
of some guiding hand. For sure He hath more burden now than man may endure. But see,
the gates fall back, and that appears Which he who loathes shall pity—yea, with
tears. [Oedipus is led in, blinded and bleeding.] The Old Men bow down and hide their
faces; some of them weep.
Chorus: Oh, terrible! Oh, sight of all This life hath crossed, most terrible! Thou
man more wronged than tongue can tell, What madness took thee? Do there crawl Live
Things of Evil from the deep To leap on man? Oh, what a leap Was His that flung thee
to thy fall!
Leader: O fallen, fallen in ghastly case, I dare not raise mine eyes
to thee; Fain would I look and ask and see, But shudder sickened from thy face.
Oedipus: Oh, pain; pain and woe! Whither? Whither? vv. 1308-1328
<77>
 They lead me and I go; And my voice drifts on the air Far away. Where, Thing of
Evil, where Endeth thy leaping hither?
Leader: In fearful ends, which none may hear
nor say.
Oedipus: Cloud of the dark, mine own. For ever, horrible, Stealing, stealing,
silent, unconquerable, Cloud that no wind, no summer can dispel! Again, again I groan,
As through my heart together crawl the strong Stabs of this pain and memories of
old wrong.
Leader: Yea, twofold hosts of torment hast thou there, The stain to think
on and the pain to bear.
Oedipus: O Friend, thou mine own. Still faithful, minister Steadfast
abiding alone of them that were, Dost bear with me and give the blind man care? Ah
me! Not all unknown Nor hid thou art. Deep in this dark a call Comes and I know thy
voice in spite of all.
Leader: O fearful sufferer, and could'st thou kill Thy living
orbs? What God made blind thy will? vv. 1329-1351
<78>
Oedipus: 'Tis Apollo; all is Apollo. O ye that love me, 'tis he long time
hath planned These things upon me evilly, evilly, Dark things and full of blood.
I knew not; I did but follow His way; but mine the hand And mine the anguish. What
were mine eyes to me When naught to be seen was good?
Leader: 'Tis even so; and Truth
doth speak in thee.
Oedipus: To see, to endure, to hear words kindly spoken, Should I have joy in such?
Out, if ye love your breath, Cast me swift unto solitude, unbroken By word or touch.
Am I not charged with death, Most charged and filled to the brim With curses? And
what man saith God hath so hated him?
Leader: Thy bitter will, thy hard calamity,
Would I had never known nor looked on thee!
Oedipus: My curse, my curse upon him. That man whom pity held in the
wilderness, Who saved the feet alive from the blood-fetter And loosed the barb thereof!
vv. 1351-1377
<79>
 That babe—what grace was done him, Had he died shelterless, He had not laid on
himself this grief to bear, And all who gave him love.
Leader: I, too, O Friend,
I had been happier.
Oedipus: Found not the way to his father's blood, nor shaken The world's scorn on
his mother, The child and the groom withal; But now, of murderers born, of God forsaken,
Mine own sons' brother; All this, and if aught can fall Upon man more perilous And
elder in sin, lo, all Is the portion of
Oedipus:
Leader: How shall I hold this counsel of thy mind True? Thou wert better
dead than living blind.
Oedipus: That this deed is not well and wisely wrought Thou shalt not show me; therefore
school me not. Think, with what eyes hereafter in the place Of shadows could I see
my father's face, Or my poor mother's? Both of whom this hand Hath wronged too deep
for man to understand. Or children—born as mine were born, to see Their shapes
should bring me joy? Great God! To me vv. 1378-1403
<80>
 There is no joy in city nor in tower Nor temple, from all whom, in this mine hour,
I that was chief in Thebes alone, and ate The King's bread, I have made me separate
For ever. Mine own lips have bid the land Cast from it one so evil, one whose hand
To sin was dedicate, whom God hath shown Birth-branded ... and my blood the dead
King's own! All this myself have proved. And can I then Look with straight eyes into
the eyes of men? I trow not. Nay, if any stop there were To dam this fount that welleth
in mine ear For hearing, I had never blenched nor stayed Till this vile shell were
all one dungeon made, Dark, without sound. 'Tis thus the mind would fain Find peace,
self-prisoned from a world of pain. O wild Kithairon, why was it thy will To save
me? Why not take me quick and kill, Kill, before ever I could make men know The thing
I am, the thing from which I grow? Thou dead King, Polybus, thou city wall Of Corinth,
thou old castle I did call My father's, what a life did ye begin, What splendour
rotted by the worm within, When ye bred me! O Crossing of the Roads, O secret glen
and dusk of crowding woods, O narrow footpath creeping to the brink Where meet the
Three! I gave you blood to drink. Do ye remember? 'Twas my life-blood, hot From mine
own father's heart. Have ye forgot What deed I did among you, and what new And direr
deed I fled from you to do? O flesh, horror of flesh!... vv. 1409-1431
<81>
 But what is shame To do should not be spoken. In God's name, Take me somewhere far
off and cover me From sight, or slay, or cast me to the sea Where never eye may see
me any more. What? Do ye fear to touch a man so sore Stricken? Nay, tremble not.
My misery Is mine, and shall be borne by none but me.
Leader: Lo, yonder comes for
answer to thy prayer Creon, to do and to decree. The care Of all our land is his,
now thou art weak.
Oedipus: Alas, what word to Creon can I speak, How make him trust me more? He hath
seen of late So vile a heart in me, so full of hate. Enter
Creon:
Creon: Not to make laughter, Oedipus, nor cast Against thee any evil of the past
I seek thee, but ... Ah God! ye ministers, Have ye no hearts? Or if for man there
stirs No pity in you, fear at least to call Stain on our Lord the Sun, who feedeth
all; Nor show in nakedness a horror such As this, which never mother Earth may touch,
Nor God's clean rain nor sunlight. Quick within! Guide him.—The ills that in a
house have been They of the house alone should know or hear. vv. 1432-1447
<82>
Oedipus: In God's name, since thou hast undone the fear Within me, coming thus, all
nobleness, To one so vile, grant me one only grace. For thy sake more I crave it
than mine own.
Creon: Let me first hear what grace thou wouldst be shown.
Oedipus: Cast me from Thebes ... now, quick ... where none may see My visage more,
nor mingle words with me.
Creon: That had I done, for sure, save that I still Tremble, and fain would ask Apollo's
will.
Oedipus: His will was clear enough, to stamp the unclean Thing out, the bloody hand,
the heart of sin.
Creon: 'Twas thus he seemed to speak; but in this sore Strait we must needs learn
surer than before.
Oedipus: Thou needs must trouble God for one so low?
Creon: Surely; thyself will trust his answer now.
Oedipus: I charge thee more ... and, if thou fail, my sin Shall cleave to thee....
For her who lies within, vv. 1448-1472
<83>
 Make as thou wilt her burial. 'Tis thy task To tend thine own. But me: let no man
ask This ancient city of my sires to give Harbour in life to me. Set me to live On
the wild hills and leave my name to those Deeps of Kithairon which my father chose,
And mother, for my vast and living tomb. As they, my murderers, willed it, let my
doom Find me. For this my very heart doth know, No sickness now, nor any mortal blow,
Shall slay this body. Never had my breath Been thus kept burning in the midst of
death, Save for some frightful end. So, let my way Go where it listeth. But my children—Nay,
Creon, my sons will ask thee for no care. Men are they, and can find them everywhere
What life needs. But my two poor desolate Maidens.... There was no table ever set
Apart for them, but whatso royal fare I tasted, they were with me and had share In
all.... Creon, I pray, forget them not. And if it may be, go, bid them be brought,
[Creon goes and presently returns with the two princesses.] Oedipus thinks he is there
all the time. That I may touch their faces, and so weep.... Go, Prince. Go, noble
heart!... If I might touch them, I should seem to keep And not to have lost them,
now mine eyes are gone.... What say I? In God's name, can it be I hear mine own vv.
1473-1505
<84>
 Beloved ones sobbing? Creon of his grace Hath brought my two, my dearest, to this
place. Is it true?
Creon: 'Tis true. I brought them, for in them I know Thy joy is, the same now as
long ago.
Oedipus: God bless thee, and in this hard journey give Some better guide than mine
to help thee live. Children! Where are ye? Hither; come to these Arms of your ...
brother, whose wild offices Have brought much darkness on the once bright eyes Of
him who grew your garden; who, nowise Seeing nor understanding, digged a ground The
world shall shudder at. Children, my wound Is yours too, and I cannot meet your gaze
Now, as I think me what remaining days Of bitter living the world hath for you. What
dance of damsels shall ye gather to, What feast of Thebes, but quick ye shall turn
home, All tears, or ere the feast or dancers come? And, children, when ye reach the
years of love, Who shall dare wed you, whose heart rise above The peril, to take
on him all the shame That cleaves to my name and my children's name? God knows, it
is enough!... My flowers, ye needs must die, waste things, bereft And fruitless.
Creon, thou alone art 23-phrase Their father now, since both of us are gone Who cared
for them. Oh, leave them not alone vv. 1505-1518
<85>
 To wander masterless, these thine own kin, And beggared. Neither think of them such
sin As ye all know in me, but let their fate Touch thee. So young they are, so desolate—
Of all save thee. True man, give me thine hand, And promise. [Oedipus and Creon clasp
hands.] If your age could understand, Children, full many counsels I could give. But
now I leave this one word: Pray to live As life may suffer you, and find a road To
travel easier than your father trod.
Creon: Enough thy heart hath poured its tears; now back into thine house repair.
Oedipus: I dread the house, yet go I must.
Creon: Fair season maketh all things fair.
Oedipus: One oath then give me, and I go.
Creon: Name it, and I will answer thee.
Oedipus: To cast me from this land. vv. 1519-1523
<86>
Creon: A gift not mine but God's thou askest me.
Oedipus: I am a thing of God abhorred.
Creon: The more, then, will he grant thy prayer.
Oedipus: Thou givest thine oath?
Creon: I see no light; and, seeing not, I may not swear.
Oedipus: Then take me hence. I care not.
Creon: Go in peace, and give these children o'er.
Oedipus: Ah no! Take not away my daughters! [They are taken from him.]
Creon: Seek not to be master more. Did not thy masteries of old forsake thee when
the end was near? vv. 1524-1530
<87>
Chorus: Ye citizens of Thebes, behold; 'tis Oedipus that passeth here, Who read the
riddle-word of Death, and mightiest stood of mortal men, And Fortune loved him, and
the folk that saw him turned and looked 23 phrase. Lo, he is fallen, and around great
storms and the outreaching sea! Therefore, O Man, beware, and look toward the end
of things that be, The last of sights, the last of days; and no man's life account
as gain Ere the full tale be finished and the darkness find him without pain. [Oedipus
is led into the house and the doors close on him.]
<-1>
